## DOT1L has opposite effects on sex chromosome-linked and autosomal gene expression during male germ cell differentiation
Manon Coulée, Clara Gobé, Mélina Blanco, Clémentine Lapoujade, Côme Ialy-Radio, Lucia Alvarez-Gonzalez, Aurora Ruiz-Herrera, Guillaume Meurice, Pierre Fouchet, Julie Cocquet and Laila El Khattabi1

### Abstract
The H3K79 methyl transferase DOT1L is essential for multiple biological processes where it has been shown to regulate gene expression. H3K79 methylation is a mark of active transcription, yet, recent studies have shown that DOT1L can induce gene repression as well as activation, in several somatic cell differentiation systems. Here, we used male germline differentiation, a highly dynamic process in terms of transcription and chromatin remodeling, as a biological model to decipher the role of DOT1L. By integrating epigenomic analyses with spike-in RNA-seq performed on Dot1l knocked-out mouse male germ cells, we showed that DOTL1 plays a dual role in gene regulation depending on the chromatin environment. At all stages (premeiotic, meiotic and postmeiotic), DOT1L inhibits more than activates gene expression, and H3K79me2 positively correlates with male germ cell genetic program. After meiosis I, where DOT1L expression radically increases, a high number of H3K79me2 regions are established, in particular on the X and Y chromosomes. In agreement with this observation, DOT1L was found to activate the expression of many XY genes enriched in H3K79me2 at their bodies and/or neighboring enhancers. In contrast, repressed genes are located in an H3K27ac-poor/H3K27me3-rich environment, devoid of H3K79me2 or restricted at their enhancers. Gene set enrichment analyses showed that, in early stages, repressed genes are involved in processes required towards the end of spermatogenesis, while, in later stages, repressed genes are involved in apoptosis. Interestingly, we identified several repressors among the genes that are positively regulated by DOT1L, in particular Bcl6 and Bcorl1, involved in the control of apoptosis, and the gene coding for histone deacetylase HDAC8; all could contribute to the repressive effect of DOT1L.  Taken together, our results indicate that DOT1L plays a pivotal role in the transcriptional and chromatin remodeling during spermatogenesis, on one hand, by directly regulating the postmeiotic (re)activation of XY genes, following meiotic sex chromosome inactivation, and, on the other hand, by indirectly controlling the timely expression of differentiation genes.
